Theoretically, our application is now done from an authentication perspective. From a user experience
perspective, not so much,
we can't tell whether we are authenticated or not,
we can't tell what we're allowed to do or not.
So for example, I certainly want to hide login and sign-up if we are logged in,
instead I want to show a logout button which deletes the token.
Additionally, we also have the problem that we don't really see if we are allowed to delete or edit this,
we always see these buttons, the same for new posts,
we see that even if we are not authenticated.
So we certainly want to adjust the UI to reflect our authentication status because that will prevent some
unnecessary errors. If I reload for example, our token is gone,
that's another issue,
it's gone because we only store it in the Angular service and that of course is just stored in the running
Javascript,
so in memory and reloading the page restarts the Angular app and therefore everything stored in services
and therefore the memory simply is gone.
So we also want to store the token somewhere else so that it survives
page reloads and these are all things I want to work on next.
Now let's actually work on updating the UI first.
We have that token stored in the auth service, so we can inject that service in any component where we
need that token to update the UI
and one such component is the header component of course.
There in the header, we get a couple of links which we only want to show if the user is authenticated
and on the other hand, I want to add a new list item here which actually is there to allow us to log
out.
This should not be a link by the way, it should be a button and therefore won't have a router link or
anything like that,
it's a button which we will need to connect to some action.
So we only want to show that button if we are authenticated, on the other hand, login and sign-up should only
be shown if we are not authenticated.
So in the header component, we can start by injecting the auth service which is where we have the token,
so here I inject the auth service of type auth service, like this, make sure to add the import to the file
at the top,
you need to import the auth service class from there
and then here, we need to use that auth service to get that token.
Now to be very precise, we should also have some listener just as we have it for our posts because that
token of course can change,
for example if we log out and clear that token and so we want to be able to push that token information
to our components which are interested.
So let's actually go to the auth service first
and besides storing the token there, I want to have another value or property here, my authStatusListener.
That will actually be a new subject imported from rxjs and I will use that subject to push
the authentication information
to the components which are interested.
So this will be a generic type
and for now it will wrap a boolean because I don't really need the token in my other components,
I only need it in my interceptor.
I just need to know, is the user authenticated or not,
so a true or false decision.
Now I will add a new method
then,
getAuthStatusListener
because it's a private property because I only want to return the observable part of that listener.
So I will return AuthStatusListener as observable
so that we can't emit new values from other components,
I only want to be able to emit from within the service but I want to be able to listen from other parts
of the app of course.
Now these other parts can call this method to get the listener,
now I want to emit a new value here in login after we got the token. There
I will use this AuthStatusListener and call next and here, the value simply is true.
So now we got a way of informing everyone who's interested about our user being authenticated. Back to
the header component where we inject auth service,
I will now implement onInit which is imported from @angular/core and I will implement
it by adding the ngOnInit method where I want to set up my subscription to that AuthStatusListener.
Now you learned that subscriptions for observables or subjects managed by you also have to be managed,
so you should unsubscribe if the component gets destroyed,
so I will add onDestroy here which forces me to add the ngOnDestroy method here. And then I'll add
a new property,
a private property, AuthListenerSubs which is a type subscription which is imported from rxjs,
so make sure to add this import at the top of your file.
In ngOnInit, we can then set the AuthListenerSubscription equal to the subscription we set up from
auth service getAuthListener which is a method which returns that listener subject and then subscribe.
That yields the subscription and in ngOnDestroy, I will take that subscription and unsubscribe. And in the subscribe method
up there,
we of course want to do something. We get a result here, isAuthenticated, we get that information and
in isAuthenticated, I can then set another public property of header component, maybe user is authenticated
to not mix up names, you could name it the same though but I want to make a clear differentiation and
that initially is false
and here, I will set this user isAuthenticated equal to the isAuthenticated information I'm getting from my
subscription.
So now we have a way of pushing that information to components and using it in the components, like this
header component.
So there I get user isAuthenticated and now in the header component, I can use that, in the template I mean,
for example for new posts. I'll add ngIf here and only add this if the user is authenticated,
so only if user is authenticated which is that property name here,
so only if that is true, only then we should be able to create new posts.
The same for logging out,
we should only be able to logout if we are logged in,
so only if we are authenticated. For login and sign-up, the opposite is the case. There
I will add not user isAuthenticated as a condition because of course I only want to show these if we're
not authenticated. If we now save this and the app reloads, we correctly see login
and if I now do login here, then we see that switches to new posts and logout, so it correctly reflects
our updated status.